docs(tutorial): install github runner on m1 (#2034)
scaleway/docs-content: tutorials/install-github-actions-runner-mac/index.mdx

---
meta:
  title: Installing a Github Actions runner on a Mac mini M1
  description: How to set up and configure a bare metal Mac mini M1 as a self-hosted runner for Github Actionos
content:
  h1: Installing a Github Actions runner on a Mac mini M1
  paragraph: How to set up and configure a bare metal Mac mini M1 as a self-hosted runner for Github Actionos
tags: mac m1 github-actions
categories: 
  - bare-metal
  - apple-silicon
dates:
  validation: 2023-08-11
  posted: 2023-08-11
---

<Macro id="iam-requirements" />

<Message type="requirement">
  You have:
  - You have an account and are logged into the [Scaleway console](https://console.scaleway.com)
  - You have [created a Mac mini M1](/bare-metal/apple-silicon/how-to/create-mac-mini-m1/)
  - You have a Github repository with administrator rights.
</Message>

## Introduction

> GitHub Actions is a CI/CD platform that allows users to automate their software development workflows, connected to a Github organization or repository. While GitHub offers online runners with a pay-as-you-go model, self-hosted runners grant increased control over your CI/CD setup and enhanced customization. This is because you manage the runners yourself, rather than relying on GitHub's infrastructure. This tutorial will show you how to set up, configure, and connect a self-hosted runner on a Mac mini M1 for executing macOS pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GitHub Actions is a CI/CD platform that allows users to automate their software development workflows, connected to a Github organization or repository. While GitHub offers online runners with a pay-as-you-go model, self-hosted runners grant increased control over your CI/CD setup and enhanced customization. This is because you manage the runners yourself, rather than relying on GitHub's infrastructure. This tutorial shows you how to set up, configure, and connect a self-hosted runner on a Mac mini M1 to execute macOS pipelines.
```

    <Message type="important">
      Github [recommends](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/hosting-your-own-runners/managing-self-hosted-runners/about-self-hosted-runners#self-hosted-runner-security) to only use self-hosted runners with private repositories for security reasons.
    </Message>

## Installing the runner

> 1. Go to [Github](https://github.com/), navigate to the main page of your repository and click **Settings**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to the main page of your [Github](https://github.com/) repository and click **Settings**.
```

2. In the left sidebar, click **Actions**, then click **Runners**.

> 3. Click **New self-hosted runner**. For the image, select **macOS** image and for the architecture, select **ARM64**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Click the **New self-hosted runner** button. You are redirected to the self-hosted runners configuration page. 
5. Select **macOS** as a runner image and **ARM64** as an architecture.
```

> 4. GitHub will prompt you to execute a series of shell commands to download the runtime and do a basic setup. Take note of those commands, as you will need to execute them on your Mac mini M1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. GitHub will prompt you to execute a series of shell commands to download the runtime and configure a basic setup. Take note of those commands, as you will need to execute them on your Mac mini M1.
```
I think this should be a note and not a proper step. It should explain what exactly happens after you select macOS and ARM64 + what you described

> 5. [Connect](/bare-metal/apple-silicon/how-to/connect-to-mac-mini-m1/) to your Mac mini M1 using VNC. The runner service needs a graphical session to be started, hence using SSH won't work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. [Connect](/bare-metal/apple-silicon/how-to/connect-to-mac-mini-m1/) to your Mac mini M1 using VNC. In this instance, SSH cannot be used as the runner service needs a graphical session to be started. 
```

> 6. Open a terminal and execute the commands that you noted in step 4. Don't launch the runner yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Open a terminal and execute the commands that you noted in step 4. Don't launch the runner yet.
```

    <Message type="note">
      This tutorial assumes that you picked the default settings when prompted during step 6.
    </Message>

## Configuring the runner

> Once you have installed the runner, you will need to configure it to use the dependencies that you need for your workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the runner is installed, you must configure it to use the dependencies needed for your workflows.
```

> 1. Install the dependencies that you need for your workflows. For example, if you need to use [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/index_fr), a popular package manager for macOS, you can install it with the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Install the dependencies needed for your workflows. For example, [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/index_fr) is a popular package manager for macOS that can be installed with the following command:
```

    ```sh
    /bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
    ```

>     Unlike in online runners where the dependencies have to be installed every that a workflow is run, with self-hosted runners you can prepare all the dependencies that you need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Unlike online runners where dependencies have to be installed each time a workflow is run, self-hosted runners allow you to prepare all the dependencies that you need.
```

> 2. The runner's shell has a different user profile. Hence, specify the content of the runner's `$PATH` variable inside the file named `.path`. This file is located in the root of the runner directory. To be able to use during a workflow the homebrew command previously installed, append this content at the end of the .path file:

Reviewer: Each numbered step should ideally start with a verb.

---
meta:
  title: Installing a Github Actions runner on a Mac mini M1

>   description: How to set up and configure a bare metal Mac mini M1 as a self-hosted runner for Github Actionos

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  description: How to set up and configure a bare metal Mac mini M1 as a self-hosted runner for GitHub Actions
```

content:
  h1: Installing a Github Actions runner on a Mac mini M1

>   paragraph: How to set up and configure a bare metal Mac mini M1 as a self-hosted runner for Github Actionos

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  paragraph: How to set up and configure a bare metal Mac mini M1 as a self-hosted runner for GitHub Actions
```

<Message type="requirement">
  You have:
  - You have an account and are logged into the [Scaleway console](https://console.scaleway.com)
  - You have [created a Mac mini M1](/bare-metal/apple-silicon/how-to/create-mac-mini-m1/)
  - You have a Github repository with administrator rights.
</Message>

## Introduction

GitHub Actions is a CI/CD platform that allows users to automate their software development workflows, connected to a Github organization or repository. While GitHub offers online runners with a pay-as-you-go model, self-hosted runners grant increased control over your CI/CD setup and enhanced customization. This is because you manage the runners yourself, rather than relying on GitHub's infrastructure. This tutorial shows you how to set up, configure, and connect a self-hosted runner on a Mac mini M1 to execute macOS pipelines.
    <Message type="important">
      Github [recommends](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/hosting-your-own-runners/managing-self-hosted-runners/about-self-hosted-runners#self-hosted-runner-security) to only use self-hosted runners with private repositories for security reasons.
    </Message>

## Installing the runner

> 1. Navigate to the main page of your [Github](https://github.com/) repository and click **Settings**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to the main page of your [GitHub](https://github.com/) repository and click **Settings**.
```

2. Click **Actions**, located under **Code and automation** on the left sidebar. A menu displays.

> 3. Click *Runners*. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Click **Runners**. 
```

4. Click the **New self-hosted runner** button. You are redirected to the self-hosted runners configuration page. 
5. Select **macOS** as a runner image and **ARM64** as an architecture.
    <Message type="note">
        After selecting the runner image and architecture, GitHub prompts you to execute a sequence of shell commands. Those commands serve to authenticate your machine with your Github repository, download the necessary runtime and set-up the runner within your environment. Take note of these commands, as you will need to execute them on your Mac mini M1.
    </Message>

> 6. [Connect](/bare-metal/apple-silicon/how-to/connect-to-mac-mini-m1/) to your Mac mini M1 using VNC. In this instance, SSH cannot be used as the runner service needs a graphical session to be started. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. [Connect](/bare-metal/apple-silicon/how-to/connect-to-mac-mini-m1/) to your Mac mini M1 using VNC. 
    <Message type="note">
      In this instance, SSH cannot be used as the runner service needs a graphical session to be started. 
    </Message>
```

7. Open a terminal and execute the commands previously prompted by Github. Don't launch the runner yet.

    <Message type="note">
      This tutorial assumes that you picked the default settings when prompted during step 6.
    </Message>

## Configuring the runner

Once the runner is installed, you must configure it to use the dependencies needed for your workflows.

> 1. Install the dependencies needed for your workflows. For example, [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/index_fr) is a popular package manager for macOS that can be installed with the following command:

Reviewer: Maybe we could add having installed a package manager as a prerequesite + add that for the sake of this tutorial, we are using Homebrew.

Author: @farhakennar Not sure what you mean here. Could you describe more in depth or make a code suggestion? thanks

Reviewer: Sure 😊! I just added Homebrew as a requirement. You can thus delete this first step as we assume the user already has a package manager installed.
